Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Cruz.
Poole Anderson is one of a small group of science fiction authors who have written future histories.
A future history is a group of stories or novels written along a consistent timeline
in the future.
Characters may or may not recur, but the intention is to speculate on the evolution
of human society beyond the present day.
Anderson actually has written two future histories.
The first is not as best known, and it consists of only a dozen or so stories.
Anderson began it in the late 1940s.
But I started out originally rather early in my career and more or less inspired by
Heinlein's future history and constructed one of my own with charts and background material
and so on, like his.
Of course mine was in mind the events were different, but basically I wanted to do a
similar job that is fictionally tell about the story of mankind from almost the present
day up at least until the early year of expansion among the stars.
This wasn't going to be the only thing I did by any means, although I would write other
things that were not in the series.
But from time to time I'd add something to it, and I did over the years.
Some of the stories in this future history are Wolf, Quixote in the Windmill, Cold Victory,
and The Snows of Ganymede.
The earliest stories in the series describe World War 3, which Anderson had said in 1958,
a war that destroys modern civilization.
But out of the war decades later rose a new civilization.
It was a repressive one dominated by the Psycho-Technic Institute, an organization which
strictly plans and controls human progress through psychological manipulation.
Anderson carefully traces out the social, political, and technological events which
shape the new society.
He describes the colonization of Venus and Mars, for instance, the development of robotics
and artificial regeneration, and the struggle toward a true world government.
In one story, The Troublemakers, he sends a space ark off to Alpha Centauri in a voyage that will
take 123 years.
But overall things don't go smoothly. Anderson envisions society undergoing many upheavals.
In Quixote in the Windmill, for instance, there are violent anti-robot riots.
And in Cold Victory, a humanist revolution occurs which overthrows the Psycho-Technic Institute.
But some of the institute's people escape to Ganymede, the largest of Jupiter's moons,
where they continue fighting.
It isn't until the story break, the last one in this particular future history,
that the institute is totally wiped out.
At this point, around the 23rd century, the human race is ready to attempt interstellar colonization.
Anderson leaves it there at the beginning of a new era.
He explains why he added no more to it.
But gradually, for a number of reasons,
got less and less interested in continuing and started phasing it out, doing less and less of it.
One reason for being less interested was that, as for the early part of it, reality was catching up with me.
Not only were public or political events not working out on my timetable,
for example, World War III did not come off on schedule, but also it turned out I had failed
to foresee a number of scientific and technological developments.
Anderson's second future history is much larger and better known.
It includes some of the most memorable characters he's created,
like Nicholas von Rine and Dominic Flandry.
We'll talk with Anderson about that series next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz and Daryl Lane.
Poole Anderson has written one of the most ambitious and extensive future histories
in science fiction.
It's usually called the Future History of the Polysoteknic League,
although a better term might be the League and Empire series.
We asked Anderson how the future history got its start.
Now that has a history much more like that of Tuipsy. It just grew.
I've written a few stories about Nicholas von Rine and a few stories about Dominic Flandry,
who lived in completely different miliaries, of course.
And then one day on an impulse, I thought, well, gosh, they could be on the same timeline,
one living about 500 years after the other.
And through an invention of that in one of the once one of the Flandry stories,
and then started fitting in other stories wherever it was convenient.
You see, the thing with the future history is that although each story should, of course,
be readable independently of any others and comprehensible and so on,
nevertheless, if you have a reader who remembers a number of them, the cross connections will
add an extra dimension and thereby a hope that's in his enjoyment.
So I started doing it that way. And after a while realized I had a rather large beast by
the tail. If I was going to stay consistent at all, then I had to keep careful notes.
And I had to develop a systematic scheme and so on.
And that's over the years one thing led to another until it all became
rather elaborate. By now it includes, no, I think something like 40 separate items of which
probably at least a third or so are full dressed novels.
The first story Nicholas Von Ryn turned up in was the novel The Man Who Counts,
which was also issued as the War of the Wingman. Von Ryn is a nonheroic type. He's a fat, loud
mouthed, cursing schemer who favors good food, drink and creature comforts. But using his wits,
he usually conquers all of his foes, human or alien. He establishes the Polysottechnic League,
a trading guild which carries earth culture throughout the stars. We asked Anderson if Von Ryn
has been popular with readers. Oh yes, there are some readers who can't stand him but they
don't ignore him either and as for the rest, he probably is the most popular character I've
ever come up with. Then about 500 years along the timeline of his future history, Anderson
introduces Dominic Flandry, an agent for the Tarran Empire. He turns up in books like Ensign
Flandry, The Rebel Worlds, Earthman Go Home, and A Night of Ghosts and Shadows. The Flandry stories
are set in the 31st century and involve the Tarran Empire's druggler with its powerful alien
antagonist, the Merseans. Flandry is the opposite of Von Ryn. He smooths, sophisticated, suave,
a man who can either fight or scheme with equal style and flair. He reminds a reader of James Bond.
We asked Anderson if the relationship was intentional. Oh no, nor did I ask this before and
as a matter of fact, the first Flandry story appeared something like 20 years before the first
James Bond story did. If I was modeling on any other character at all, it would probably have
had to be somebody like the sink. Anderson says he probably won't be adding any more to the future
history of the Polysoteknic League and the Tarran Empire, but there's enough material there already
to keep a science fiction reader busy for a long time. We'll have some more on Poole Anderson next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Cruz. A number of science fiction authors employ the technique
of worldbuilding in their stories. Poole Anderson is one of the best at worldbuilding. He explains the
term. The term simply refers to the construction of an imaginary world as a setting for a story
in considerable detail. Now, lots of people have done this. An obvious example, for example,
would be J.R.R. Tolkien in The Lord of the Rings and Related Stories. He constructs an imaginary
world in vast detail, complete down the fine points of the various languages spoken and so on.
Anderson's first extensive attempt at worldbuilding was the Planet Diomedes,
which was a setting for his novel The Man Who Counts. He meticulously constructs the
planet in detail that allows winged intelligent beings. The atmosphere, for example, is very
heavy, which is necessary to support a large flying creature. Anderson explains why he spends
so much time constructing his planets in consistent and careful detail.
After all, we really cannot reasonably expect that any other planet anywhere in the universe
will be very much like Earth. We'll probably be lucky if we find a few where humans can live
without artificial help. And you're certainly not going to have native humans around there
or oak trees or rabbits or any other feature that we know here on Earth.
That's just preposterous, to suppose, on the basis of everything we know about the evolution of life
here on Earth. So, in that case, let's try to set up some of the features which are different.
After all, one reason people read science fiction is precisely that they like to get away from the
world around them once in a while and escape into something exotic. In my opinion,
to the extent that this exotic thing can be made at the same time realistic and convincing,
the reader is getting his money's worth.
Almost any world constructed by Anderson in his science fiction stories is put together with
attention given to basic scientific laws. Anderson, after all, was a physics student in
college and knows his science. Other authors, Hal Clement and Larry Niven come to mind, practice
careful world building too. In fact, Clement says his science fiction novel challenges its readers
to find any scientific errors committed by the author. Clement calls this The Game. Anderson
elaborates on it. The game consists in an author setting up a world or a situation or something
the very best he can and writing a story about it.
And then that's all he can do. He's made his move and that's it. And readers are free to
thereafter to try to figure out from the story exactly what he had in mind and exactly where he
may have gone wrong. So I've gotten some very interesting mail on technical points. And yes,
sometimes they have indicated to me that I've goofed on this or that detail, but all right.
Wondering from that, I don't mind. With Anderson and with other world builders,
a reader gets a bonus to accompany an exciting narrative, interesting and accurate science.
More with Poole Anderson in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next,
is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz and Daryl Lane. Poole Anderson is noted both as a master world builder and as a
creator of believable aliens. He matches aliens to their planets with meticulous and loving care
and with great concern for scientific accuracy. One of the best examples of his talents in this area
is the race of winged creatures included in his future history of the Polysotheknic League.
Actually, he constructed two separate races of winged beings,
the Diomedians from the Nicholas Von Ryn novel The Man Who Counts and the Ythrians of the planet
Avalon. Anderson explains how he got interested in intelligent beings with the ability to fly.
All the way back when, many years ago, I mean many years ago,
it's about 40 by now, Elsprake the Camp had published an article on
intelligent non-human beings. He used basic physical principles to demolish a number of notions,
you know, like the idea of a giant insect and so on. It's just impossible. It would collapse
under its own weight because it hasn't got the structure to support that weight, things like that.
And one thing he doubted was that you could have an intelligent being which flies
because the wing loading that a living flyer can absorb is or take
is so small that there just wouldn't be room for a sizable brain.
Anderson thought about the camp's arguments and at last came to at least a partial solution.
Well, science fiction writers tend to take this sort of a thing as a challenge.
And so when I wrote The Man Who Counts quite a while ago,
I did have wing intelligent beings, but I designed a planet such that it had a very dense atmosphere
which of course would make it easier to get about in the air.
I also made them essentially six-limbed so that they could have not only wings but
legs and hands. Well, after what I got to thinking that that had been a kind of a cop-out,
couldn't there be some way to do it better? Could it conceivably be done on an earth-like planet?
I couldn't see any way. The camp's arguments were there and they made sense.
At this point, the famous science fiction editor, John W. Campbell, came to the rescue.
Well, when it happened, the very last time I saw the late John W. Campbell,
we, I was in New York and visited his office and we went out to lunch together.
This was not long before his death and we sat there talking.
And during their conversation, Anderson brought up the problem of constructing a large intelligent
creature who could fly. Campbell suggested a way to do it.
And he immediately said, well, suppose it had some sort of leg-driven
supercharging bellows that would give a tremendous curse of ability.
And I immediately saw that this was a way to power a winged animal, give it sufficient energy that
it actually could fly in an atmosphere like our own.
Although it might weigh as much as 100 tons.
So on this hint, Anderson created the Ithrians of the planet Avalon.
The people of the wind is probably the best known of his novels involving the Ithrians,
but Anderson used them in a number of stories in his Polycystoknecht League Future History.
Next time, we'll have more with Poole Anderson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Cruz.
One of the present masters of science fiction and fantasy,
an author whose work stretches back four decades into the golden age of science fiction,
is Poole Anderson.
It's hard to type Anderson.
He's a full-time professional who writes all kinds of fantasy and science fiction.
He's known as a writer of hard science, for example,
which can be seen in novels like Tau Zero or The Man Who Counts,
a fine example of world building.
He's constructed two future histories.
The best known one, the history of the Polycystoknecht League,
contains some of his most famous characters and some of his most fascinating alien cultures.
Some of the best of contemporary fantasy comes from his pen also,
in novels like The Broken Sword and Three Hearts and Three Lions.
And he sometimes writes tongue-in-cheek spooks,
as in his novel The High Crusade,
in which the medieval warriors with swords conquer a space-faring galactic civilization.
Anderson has won numerous Nebula and Hugo awards for his fiction,
and he served as president of the Science Fiction Writers of America.
He knows the field like few others do.
We asked him if science fiction has changed in the years he's been writing it.
Oh yes, I've been a great many changes.
Back around 1940 or so,
well, practically all you could get, unless you heart back to a few writers like Wells and Bern,
practically all you could get was in a few pulp magazines.
Nowadays, of course,
there's an overwhelming flood of it.
It is not possible to read all which appears.
Anderson thinks the image of science fiction has changed over the years.
And also, of course, it's no longer disreputable. It's become quite respectable.
Oh, you know, when I was your age, it was unthinkable
that anybody could arrange a telephone interview with
one of the writers of it under the auspices of a college for heaven's sake.
But Lord, this was pulp fiction. It was beyond the pale.
Nowadays, it's been tough in college courses and all, you know, all this other stuff, you know.
He believes that science fiction has had an important impact on the public,
and he tells us why he thinks science fiction is valuable.
Actually, all this is kind of trivial. I think the important thing is that
the basic concepts have sort of permeated the public mind.
And I think people are aware in that nowadays, in a way that they never used to be aware,
that the future is going to be different from the past. It may be better. It may be worse,
whatever, but it's going to be different and in very fundamental ways.
And they tend to accept this, be prepared for it.
I often say that perhaps the most important public service that science fiction is doing
is by casting a certain glamour over science and technology.
It recruits a lot of young people into these fields and heaven knows we need an awful lot of
scientists and technologists. Anderson is still going strong today. You'll find his latest work at any bookstore.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.